Hi, my name is Brian Caffo.
And this is the lecture on confounding as
part of our executive data science series.
I'd like to thank Jeff Leek who wrote
these slides, and I'm giving the lecture.
So sometimes you see
unexpected patterns in data.
And as an example, we have here the number
of people who've drowned by falling into
a pool, by the films Nicholas Cage
has appeared in over time.
And there's a strong correlation
just by happenstance.
So what are some of the reasons that
we see spurious correlations in data?
Probably this example isn't the best,
because this isn't really
an example of confounding.
And we'll go over why in a few slides.
But one potential reason we
see associations that maybe
don't make sense or are not real is
because of the idea of confounding.
And confounding is one of
the central topics in statistics.
And I would say it's one
of the core reasons that
observational data analysis is hard.
Let's go through a simple exam
that Jeff concocted just to
illustrate the principle of confounding.
Here we see a picture of Jeff
playing with his son Dexter.
He points out that he has big shoes,
and he's literate,
he claims he's somewhat literate, but
I've seen him read and he's literate.
And Dexter has little tiny shoes and
is not literate because he's a little kid.
So, imagine conducting a data analysis
with some variables, and
you see an association like that.
Well, in this example you might say,
okay, well,
is shoe size associated with literacy?
But there's another variable,
which is age.
In this case, Dexter is young and
Jeff is older, middle aged he claims.
And so that is ultimately the intermediary
between the relationship.
So we might put it in a graph like this
where we have shoe size, literacy and
age, and we have the arrows in the sense
that age corresponds to shoe size.
Younger people have smaller feet.
Older people have bigger feet.
And age corresponds to literacy.
As we age and develop,
we develop our reading skills.
And so this is the idea of confounding.
That the confounder exists between
what you're using to predict, and
what you are predicting.
And it, the name confounder,
comes because it can confound.
In other words,
it confounds the relationship
that you're trying to look at.
So, here's another funny example that he
came up with that came from the XKCD comic
book, where sales correlate with
geography, but so do lots of other things.
And this is basically what
this comic is illustrating,
is that whenever you look
at any of these heat maps.
Right?
What you see are very consistent hotspots,
and
those hotspots tend to just be where most
people live, and the comics says, pet
peeve #208, geographic profile maps which
are specifically just population maps.
In other words,
whatever you're trying to study and
geography is being confounded by the
number of people that live in that area.
So confounding just to reiterate and
to summarize this lecture, confounding
is the idea that a relationship between
a variable you're interested in and
an outcome is spurious and
really due to a third variable that
really is associated with the other two.
Okay?
And so It's very often the case that we
find relationships in our data set and
have to be able to navigate
through things like confounding
to figure out whether these associations
are real, or whether they're fake.
And just to give you a sense to
foreshadow some later lectures,
how do we deal with confounding?
How do we address it?
Well the big way that we address it
is through things like adjustment.
In the first case with the shoe size
example if we had a bunch of people and
we had their shoe sizes and we had a bunch
of people and we had their reading levels.
If we fit a model that had shoe size
we'd get a positive association but
if we adjust it for age right?
If we adjusted for age,
then that association would go away.
Same thing here where if we looked at
geography as it was associated with
whatever they were looking at, subscribers
to Martha Stewart Living in this case.
And we accounted for
population density at that
geographic location,
then the relationship would go away, okay?
So, adjustment,
things like adjustment using models,
is going to be one of the ways that
we look to, to address confounding.